Define non-negative integer option (#741)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/registry.md

> or the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used to set the currency and related
> options (such as the number of fraction digits).

### Non-Negative Integer Options

Some _options_ of number _functions_ are defined to take a "non-negative integer".
Implementations of number _functions_ use these _options_ to control aspects of numeric display
such as the number of fraction, integer, or significant digits.

> A "non-negative integer" is an _option_ value that the _function_ evaluates as an integer 
> greater than or equal to zero.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A "non-negative integer" is an _option_ value that can be coerced to an integer
that is greater than equal to zero,
according to implementation-specific coercion rules.
```

Maybe this helps address my other comment too: the subsequent text could say that even though the coercion rules are implementation-specific, they MUST at least be defined so that a stringified integer can be coerced to an integer.

Author: I like this text. I originally thought about using the word "coerce" here. But that gets us back into the type game. I also added the bits about "... that the _function_ evaluates..." to make clear that it is **_not_** message format that is doing the evaluation/coercion (or at least not-necessarily the MF code).

We could say "implementation-specific coercion rules", although I think we want implementations to accept a sequence of ASCII digits (so that _message_ are portable). It seems dubious that anyone will get this wrong, given that one can have  a a number between `0` and maybe around `32` inclusive that produces some kind of meaningful result. (I mean, yeah, technically you can have "max int" digits, but that is a stupendously sized number and won't fit on most screens....... or print on less than a ream of paper 😁). With that in mind, I basically want us to say: "some implementation defined number type with a non-negative value or one of these ASCII digit strings". All else is rubbish.

Reviewer: > I like this text. I originally thought about using the word "coerce" here. But that gets us back into the type game. I also added the bits about "... that the _function_ evaluates..." to make clear that it is **_not_** message format that is doing the evaluation/coercion (or at least not-necessarily the MF code).
> 

Right, I think I understand what you were trying to do, but "evaluates" is a bit too vague for my tastes. I understand your objection to "coerce", though.

> We could say "implementation-specific coercion rules", although I think we want implementations to accept a sequence of ASCII digits (so that _message_ are portable). It seems dubious that anyone will get this wrong, given that one can have a a number between `0` and maybe around `32` inclusive that produces some kind of meaningful result. (I mean, yeah, technically you can have "max int" digits, but that is a stupendously sized number and won't fit on most screens....... or print on less than a ream of paper 😁). With that in mind, I basically want us to say: "some implementation defined number type with a non-negative value or one of these ASCII digit strings". All else is rubbish.

Well, if we really want these to be finite enumerations, that's a lot easier :) Is there anything wrong with saying that the input MUST be either a string in `{"1", "2", ..., "32"}` or an integer in the interval [1, 32]?

Author: Different implementations will have different max values for these options. I didn't want to put a hard definition in. We could have a note that says "expect a small number". I would be surprised, for this particular set of options, if any implementation supported a value with more than two digits, but I don't think we need to prevent it here per-se.

There is a buffer-overflow attack from our syntax. This is valid:

```
{$n :number maximumFractionDigits=123456789123456789123456789123456789} <- plus more digits if you want
```

> Implementations MAY define an upper limit on the resolved value 

Reviewer 2: Do we want to say anything about what implementations should do about the lower bound?

Author: The lower bound is always zero.

Reviewer 2: Well, yes :) But it seems like we don't say anything about what should happen when the passed value is, in fact, negative? Should functions emit an error? Perhaps we need a sister error to the `Operand Mismatch Error`, but for invalid options?

Should I file a separate issue about this?

Author: `Invalid Option` suggests itself as a sub-species of `Invalid Expression`.

A negative number won't parse correctly about the same way that the string `moo` or the string `$57%` does not parse as a non-negative integer. FWIW, `1,234` does not parse according to the rules laid out here nor does `11.0`

The reason for upper bounds, of course, is overflow prevention.

of a non-negative integer option consistent with that implementation's practical limits.

The implementation MAY accept any implementation-defined type as the value.

> Implementations MUST accept the value as a _literal_.

Reviewer 2: I think this is slightly ambiguous, or at least it is to my non-native ears. I'd suggest reversing this sentence, so that it's clear that implementations must accept *at least* literals.

```suggestion
Implementations MUST accept a _literal_ as the value.
```

> Implementations MUST accept a _literal_ as the value.

Reviewer: As @eemeli said, this is confusing. Functions aren't passed a data model node, and a _literal_ here could only mean that. 

My suggestion is to define this similarly to how the operand of `:string` is defined:

> The operand of :string is either any implementation-defined type that is a string or for which conversion to a string is supported

and say that a (thing that can be the operand of `:string`) MUST be accepted if it matches `non-negative` in the ABNF.

Perhaps it would be helpful to have a section at the beginning of the registry spec defining the set of implementation-defined types -- that is, it has to at least include a string type, and then, we could have a name for the set of things that can be converted to strings. From there, it would be possible to give a name to the set of things that can be converted to numbers.

> or the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used to set the currency and related
> options (such as the number of fraction digits).

### Digit Size Options

Some _options_ of number _functions_ are defined to take a "digit size option".
Implementations of number _functions_ use these _options_ to control aspects of numeric display
such as the number of fraction, integer, or significant digits.

A "digit size option" is an _option_ value that the _function_ interprets
as a small integer value greater than or equal to zero.
Implementations MAY define an upper limit on the resolved value 
of a digit size option option consistent with that implementation's practical limits.

In most cases, the value of a digit size option will be a string literal that
encodes the value as a decimal integer.
Implementations MAY also accept implementation-defined types as the value.

> The _literal_ representation of a digit size option matches the following ABNF:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The textual representation of a digit size option matches the following ABNF:
```

This looks good except that using _literal_ here still puts one foot on each side of the abstraction barrier between function implementations and MessageFormat. I think what we really want to say is that a valid option is anything that resolves to a string matching `digit-size-option`. But I think "textual" gets it across.

Author: Well... what we really mean is "... anything that resolves to an integer between zero and some number that doesn't exceed 99..."

I used _literal_ here because I mean the _literal_ production in our syntax. Where literal doesn't belong is on line 633. One more fix...

> or the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used to set the currency and related
> options (such as the number of fraction digits).

### Non-Negative Integer Options

Some _options_ of number _functions_ are defined to take a "non-negative integer".
In most cases, these control the number of various kinds of digits.

A "non-negative integer" is one of:
- an implementation-defined integer numeric type where the value of the 
  encoded number is not less than zero

> - a literal consisting only of ASCII digits U+0030 through U+0039;

Reviewer 3: Saying "literal" here would mean that a variable reference resolving to a numeric string value would not be valid. This is problematic because it would introduce a new requirement for a function implementation to be able to tell apart a literal string value and a variable string value.

```suggestion
- a string consisting only of ASCII digits U+0030 through U+0039;
```

Author: I said "literal" to allow the value to be quoted, e.g. `maximumFractionDigits=|11|`

I agree that my phrasing wouldn't allow a variable reference, but the item to fix to accomplish that is the first one. Change to follow...

> or the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used to set the currency and related
> options (such as the number of fraction digits).

### Non-Negative Integer Options

Some _options_ of number _functions_ are defined to take a "non-negative integer".

> In most cases, these control the number of various kinds of digits.

Author: ```suggestion
In this specification, these _options_ are used to control aspects of numeric display
such as the number of fraction, integer, or significant digits.
```

> or the type `com.ibm.icu.util.CurrencyAmount` can be used to set the currency and related
> options (such as the number of fraction digits).

### Non-Negative Integer Options

Some _options_ of number _functions_ are defined to take a "non-negative integer".
Implementations of number _functions_ use these _options_ to control aspects of numeric display
such as the number of fraction, integer, or significant digits.

A "non-negative integer" is an _option_ value that the _function_ evaluates as an integer 
greater than or equal to zero.
Implementations MAY define an upper limit on the resolved value 
of a non-negative integer option consistent with that implementation's practical limits.

The implementation MAY accept any implementation-defined type as the value.
Implementations MUST accept the value as a _literal_.

> When the value is a _literal_,
> it MUST consist of a sequence of ASCII digits in the range U+0030 through U+0039.

Reviewer 3: The MUST for literals + MAY for variables is _fine_, though it feels a bit clumsy -- I don't really see the need for allowing implementations to vary here.

Beyond that, I do have one remaining qualm about this: There's no reason for us to explicitly allow for e.g. `001` to be a valid representation of an integer. We've spec'd `number-literal` to match JSON, and if we don't restrict this to be a subset of its number representation, then an implementation could not use a JSON parser to parse and validate all numeric values.

In ABNF, the matching rule is `%x30 / (%x31-39 *DIGIT)`, which probably could be used here as well.

```suggestion
When the value is a _literal_,
it MUST consist of a sequence of ASCII digits matching the regular expression `^0|[1-9][0-9]*$`.
```

Author: I didn't rule out zero prefixes (and I show one in the example set below) but we could do that here. We haven't used much with regex elsewhere, so we might want to stick to ABNF here also.

```suggestion
When the value is a _literal_, it MUST match `non-negative` in this ABNF:
>```abnf
>non-negative = "0" / (("1"-"9") *DIGIT)
>```
```

> > **Examples of  non-negative integer options**
> > 
> > Here are some examples of valid literals:
> > ```
> > {$n :number maximumFractionDigits=12}
> > {$n :number maximumFractionDigits=|12|}
> > {$n :number maximumFractionDigits=123456}
> > {$n :number maximumFractionDigits=|0123|}
> > ```
> > Note that the value can be passed as an input variable or defined via a declaration.
> > For example, the following _messages_ might be valid in an implementation that
> > accepted the type `int` and the variable `min` were passed as input:
> > ```
> > .local $max = {1 :integer}
> > {{You have {$n :number maximumFractionDigits=$max}}}
> >
> > {{{$n :number minimumFractionDigits=$min} where 'min' is an 'int' >= 0}}
> >
> > .local $max = {|2|}
> > {{{$n :number maximumFractionDigits=$max} where 'max' is a literal}}
> > ```

Reviewer 3: I'd leave all of this out as unnecessary fluff; the preceding language is clear enough.

My opinion on this isn't very strong, though.

```suggestion
```

Author: I'd leave it out too, but included it as illustration while we work through this.

### Non-Negative Integer Options

Some _options_ of number _functions_ are defined to take a "non-negative integer".
In this specification, these _options_ are used to control aspects of numeric display
such as the number of fraction, integer, or significant digits.

A "non-negative integer" is a variable reference or literal whose value evaluates 
as an integer greater than or equal to zero.
If the value is passed as a literal

> it MUST contain only the ASCII digits U+0030 through U+0039.

Reviewer 3: This is still problematic. Consider these two example messages:
```
literal: {42 :number minimumFractionDigits=2}
```
```
variable: {42 :number minimumFractionDigits=$foo}
```

With the current proposed language, formatting the first is valid, because there the `2` is a literal, but formatting the second with `{ foo: '2' }` as input is invalid, because it's a variable, and we're here establishing stricter rules for variables than literals.

The problem with that is that in order to make that differentiation, one of two things must happen:
1. The messageformat runtime implementation must parse the numeric value out of the literal before passing it to the `:number` implementation as an integer, or emitting an error if it doesn't match the expectations. This requires for `:number` to somehow communicate to the runtime its expectations on the types of its options, and for types to be introduced to the runtime. I really doubt that we want this.
2. The `:number` implementation must be able to tell where an option value comes from, so that it can apply one set of rules to literal values and another to variable values. In practice, with the examples as above, it would mean that a `:number` implementation would need to be called with
   ```
   number(context, Literal('42'), { minimumFractionDigits: Literal('2') })
   ```
   for the first message, and with
   ```
   number(context, Literal('42'), { minimumFractionDigits: Variable('2') })
   ```
   for the second, so that `Literal('2')` and `Variable('2')` could be differentiated.

   This would be a new, additional requirement on implementations, as without this addition it is possible for a valid runtime to call a `:number` implementation for either message as
   ```
   number(context, '42', { minimumFractionDigits: '2' })
   ```

So let's not introduce language here or elsewhere that differentiates the treatment of literal vs variable values, because that would add complexity to all custom functions in all implementations. Instead, let's just allow for a variable with a value of `'2'` to get treated the exact same as a literal `2` in options.

Author: The idea here is to impose implementation details on implementations of `:number` (and `:integer`), not on MF. There has to be a clear delineation for message authors about what literal values are accepted. I will try to clarify that.

Author: (also, I didn't read "passed as a literal" to only mean in the syntax, but also as the value of a variable)

Reviewer: I still think there's some confusion because this text isn't defining a syntactic property, it's defining the runtime interface with a function implemented in another language, so saying "must accept a string" doesn't mean you can't write `maximumFractionDigits=|11|` in the syntax. Passing in a string of length 4 that begins and ends with a '|' should be an error if an integer option is expected. _Function implementations_ take parsed values (though of course this area is muddy because we avoid saying what a parsed value is.)

Author: > so saying "must accept a string" doesn't mean you can't write maximumFractionDigits=|11| in the syntax. Passing in a string of length 4 that begins and ends with a '|' should be an error if an integer option is expected

Nah. That thing to the right of the equals sign can't be anything _but_ a literal (or a variable with its `$` sigil). That means it can be quoted. We very explicitly say that there is no difference between `|11|` and `11`. As far as MF is concerned, all there is to the right of the equals is a literal. It is up to the number function to decide what to do with it.

A _literal_ of length 4 that begins and ends with a `|` looks like `maxiumumFractionDigits=|\|11\||` in our syntax.

Functions implementations can get typed values via variable references, e.g. `maximumFractionDigits=$maxDigits` where `$maxDigits` is some kind of `int`-like type. Otherwise it must parse a literal. This is "number functions" defining what literals it accepts and what it does with them.

Reviewer: Maybe what's confusing is that there are two different parsers:

- The MessageFormat parser takes a MessageFormat string and produces a data model, which includes nodes representing _literals_ in the syntax.
- Each function implementation has its own parser that takes strings (or other implementation-defined types) and produces some implementation-defined type, in this case a number.

The first parser is responsible for stripping the '|' characters, so that the second parser doesn't need to have its own partial implementation of MessageFormat syntax. That's what I meant.

Author: I see what you mean. The registry spec is written from the outside in: it talks about what you can have in the _message_ syntax and uses MF's terminology for that. So the first parser is what is in play. You're correct that the number function implementation never sees the `|` in your example. It gets the literal string `11` and parses it. That implementation, by the way, is probably glue code that calls the ultimate formatter.

> that means defining common types across the interface

I don't agree. I don't think the **_default_** registry should touch types nor does it need to. The **_default_** registry should be written in a type-neutral way, allowing local implementations to define variable types (for operands or option values) as needed/expected by users. An implementation of the number functions in the registry (as an example) could be written entirely in a language that has no number type or integer type and could work entirely in terms of strings, with only strings/literals as input. (That would be weird, but it could happen). 

What `registry.md` defines is what the function is supposed to do; what operands are accepted (which mostly means: is there an accepted literal form?); and what options/option values are accepted (with the values defining what literal forms can be passed--if any--for implementation-defined variable values).

Reviewer: I don't think the default registry can be completely type-neutral; it already refers to string types. That's what I mean by "a common type": I can't see how I would rewrite this spec without assuming the implementation had a string type. So why not talk about strings here, given that the formatting spec already says "The resolution of a text or literal MUST resolve to a string"?

Author: I turned the text hear upside down and I think it works better: now we presume a decimal integer string and permit other types. See what you think.
